(IF I HAD A HEART PLAYING)
it is no surprise to me
that these Northmen
have arrived in Wessex.
After I heard about their
raids into Northumbria,
I realized it was only
a matter of time
before they came ashore here.
When I lived at the court
of the Emperor Charlemagne,
of long and blessed memory,
these Northmen had already
emerged from their lairs
to attack parts of his empire.
And I remember an incident
from this period very well.
I was with Charlemagne's party
at a harbor town
in southern Gaul.
As we sat eating supper,
a fleet of pirates
attacked the harbor.
There was some confusion
about their identity,
but from the build of their ships
and their speed through the water,
the Emperor recognized them
at once as Northmen.
After a lightning attack...
(EXHALES)
They made their escape.
The Emperor's men took up the chase,
but they were soon out-sailed.
Charlemagne rose from the table and
stood at the window, facing east.
I remember it as clearly
as if it were yesterday.
For a long time, he stood
while the tears
poured down his face.
In the end, he said, "Do you
know why I weep so bitterly?
"It's not because I'm afraid these
ruffians will do me any harm.
"I am sick at heart
"to think that
even in my lifetime,
"they have dared
to attack this coast.
"And I am horror-stricken when I
foresee what evil they will do
"to my descendants
and their subjects."
And now, it is our turn
to deal with these ruffians.
These pagans.
But deal with them we shall.
And must.
Aethelwulf?
Yes, Father.
I put it in your hands to work with
our ealdormen to raise an army.
In the meantime,
we shall send spies and others
to observe the size of the raiding
party and their intentions.
These Northmen never like to
venture far from their ships,
and they prefer not to be
drawn into pitched battle.
Let us not be afraid,
but rather watchful.
And ultimately, decisive.
As the Emperor was.
(BIRDS CHIRPING)
What is that place?
It's a Christian church,
a minster.
A large one.
It may be Winchester.
Is it important?
If it is Winchester, Saint
Birinus is buried there.
It's a place of
great pilgrimage.
And will there
be treasure there?
Yes. A lot
of treasure.
(CHUCKLES)
(EAGLE SCREECHES)
SIGVARD: Lagertha!
Why must I follow
you up the fields?
You're my wife.
You should be at my side, especially
when we have important guests.
I will not stay to
hear my son insulted.
Your son should
know his place.
He continues
to be resentful.
He refuses to accept or
acknowledge my love for him.
You don't
love my son.
You don't love
anyone, Sigvard.
You don't know
how to.
(GROANS)
Forgive me, Lagertha.
I'm an intemperate man.
I find it difficult
to control myself.
But l have loved and desired
you after my fashion,
and if your son will
only meet me halfway,
I will make sure he
has a good future.
(SHEEP BLEATING)
(INDISTINCT CHATTERING)
(SHUDDERING)
(BELL TOLLING)
MAN 1: The alarm!
(CLAMORING)
MAN 2: Inside, now!
(BELL CONTINUES TOLLING)
(INDISTINCT SHOUTING)
(GROANS)
(CROWD SCREAMING)
Ready?
Weapons!
(BELL CONTINUES TOLLING)
(ANIMALS BLEATING)
(SHOUTING)
(SHOUTS)
(GRUNTS)
(MAN SCREAMS)
(SHOUTS)
(SCREAMS)
(GRUNTING)
(PANTING)
(GRUNTS)
(SCREAMING)
Could be a trap.
Shield-wall!
Open.
Where have
they all gone?
There should
be treasure.
He said there
would be treasure.
Why do you always
listen to him?
Where is it?
It's over there.
This? This is
not treasure.
This is an empty
wooden table.
You are mistaken,
King Horik.
The treasure is here.
You're standing on it.
(KNOCKS)
(STRAINING)
(GRUNTING)
(LAUGHS)
You were right!
(MEN LAUGHING)
Look, it's treasure!
How did you know?
It is a Christian habit
to bury the bones of the revered
dead beneath the altar.
Ragnar!
HORIK: Let me see that.
(TREASURE CLATTERING)
(MEN LAUGHING)
Who was this?
It must be
Saint Birinus.
You keep talking to me like
I know what a saint is.
A saint is a man who has lived
a particularly holy life,
performed some miracle,
or been martyred,
killed, for their beliefs.
MAN: It's all gold!
But I am dead.
What use can I be?
(CHUCKLES)
Christians believe that the bones
can still exert benediction.
Can perform miracles.
What is a miracle?
Miracles are things
which are impossible to do.
HORIK: Take it all.
It's heavy.
Wait.
MAN: What do they want?
(WOMAN GASPS)
(WOMAN SCREAMS)
(SHUDDERING)
No! Stop!
(GROANS)
(GASPING)
(SPEAKING
IN NATIVE TONGUE)
(IN NATIVE TONGUE)
You speak
our language. How?
It doesn't matter.
Just do as I say. Hide.
Hide, or they will kill you.
You're one of us.
Once. Then, I will
tell you this.
One day,
you will be caught.
We will catch you
and crucify you,
for an apostate is the lowest
and the vilest of all creatures
in the eyes of God.
Oh.
(IN NATIVE TONGUE)
(SCREAMING)
(SPEAKING LATIN)
(GROANS)
(MEN LAUGHING)
(IN NATIVE TONGUE)
(CHEERING)
What will
happen to him?
You just wait
and see, Priest.
(MEN LAUGH)
(PRIEST PRAYING IN LATIN)
(GROANS)
(MEN CHEER)
(CONTINUES PRAYING)
(RUSTLING)
(OBJECTS CLATTERING)
(MAN CHEERS)
MAN: More treasure!
Here!
(GROANS)
(MEN CHEERING)
(LAUGHING)
(PRIEST PRAYING IN LATIN)
(MEN CHEER)
(CONTINUES PRAYING)
FLOKI: Is he still talking?
Tough old goat.
HORIK: Erlendur, quiet him.
Right in his mouth.
(GASPING)
(PRIEST CONTINUES PRAYING)
(GASPS)
(BLESSING IN LATIN)
Suffer no more, but
trust in thy salvation.
(GROANS WEAKLY)
(SLICES)
(INDISTINCT CHATTERING)
Mother, why would you allow
him to do that to you?
What are you
talking about?
Your husband,
Earl Sigvard.
I saw him.
Bjorn, please.
Please what?
Has he
hit you before?
Will you let
him hit you again?
It will never
happen again.
If it does,
I'll kill him.
I said it won't.
What would
Ragnar say?
What has it to do with your father?
Nothing.
Sometimes I think
of him.
I miss him.
I can't help it.
Of course not.
You're his son.
You must
always be proud.
As should you,
for being his wife.
(CHILDREN PLAYING)
(SIGHS)
Another son?
(BABY COOS)
Yes.
What is his name?
Sigurd,
after my father.
Sigurd Snake-in-the-Eye.
MAN: Close the gate!
EDMUND: Your Majesty, you have
heard of the attack on Winchester?
Of course.
I grieve.
EDMUND: The martyrdom of my
fellow bishop, Bishop Swithern.
A fine Christian.
ECBERT: Praise be to God.
There are those who ask
why we did not do more
to protect our brothers and sisters
at such an important site.
ECBERT: Are there?
What answer did you give them,
My Lord Eadric?
(LAUGHS)
Perhaps he did not
have an answer.
I've never found Lord Eadric
to be at a loss for words.
(MEN LAUGH)
I confess, Sire, that
in this case, it's true.
I had no ready answer.
No, because it's always easier to
be wise after the fact, is it not?
My kingdom is very large.
There are many
important sites.
Could I protect
all of them? No.
Did I want to discover where
the pagans would strike?
Yes.
For now I know
where they are.
So Bishop Swithern was
a necessary sacrifice.
As a man of God, I assumed he welcomed
the opportunity for martyrdom.
Or do you disagree?
Oh, no, Sire.
All of the cloth would welcome
martyrdom in the cause of our faith,
service of our
lord Jesus Christ.
Good.
Because I'm going to offer you
precisely that same opportunity,
My Lord Bishop.
And, I trust,
very soon.
(SIGHS DEEPLY)
TORSTEIN: It's times like this
I miss our friend Arne.
He could always make us laugh.
Even in the darkest moments.
Now, he's making
the gods laugh.
That's why they took him from
us, 'cause they were jealous.
(CHUCKLES)
Speaking of gods...
I have something
for you, Athelstan.
Don't you want it?
Are these not
the images of your god?
I told you before,
and I will tell you again.
My god is Odin,
the Allfather.
I know you've told me.
Only, I don't believe you.
And this?
Ragnar gave me this.
Wearing a dog turd
doesn't make you a dog.
Oh!
I have something
else for you.
The hand of your
holy man, I believe.
(CHUCKLES)
So tell me, how do
you find England?
It is a pleasant land,
rich with treasure.
You are right.
This land is rich.
But here, here is
the real treasure.
(SMELLS)
Earth?
Have you not seen? Everywhere
we go, there are crops.
There is food growing.
I am a farmer and
the son of a farmer,
and this is what
I understand.
Compared to our poor countries
where it is hard to farm,
hard to live,
here, it is easy.
If we lived here, we could feed everybody.
There would be no hunger.
I like your thinking,
but here is my question.
Will the Saxons simply invite
us to live among them?
Hmm?
(PEOPLE CHEERING LOUDLY)
(APPLAUDING)
(CHEERING)
(INDISTINCT CHATTERING)
Friends, family,
what's left of it,
so, l am married
for the second time.
As most of you know, my first
marriage lasted less than an hour,
because my own brother
poisoned the drinks that day.
Of course, the same thing
can never happen twice,
so let the wine
be poured.
(CHEERING)
(BANGING TABLE)
Now, who will be the first
to drink in celebration?
I will.
No. No, I could not bear it.
Not a second time.
Let me taste the wine.
(COUGHING)
That's good enough.
(CHEERING)
I have something
else important to say.
I don't wish to
dampen the celebrations,
but you all know that the
agreement between myself,
King Horik and Ragnar
Lothbrok has been broken.
They have gone raiding west
without me, without us,
which is an insult not only
to myself, but to all of you.
And now, also to my wife
and to my wife's family.
I have to do something
about this insult.
Frankly, I blame King Horik
more for what has happened,
but at the same time consider what
is happening to Earl Ragnar's lands.
He has abandoned them
to the care of his wife
and his drunken brother.
(LAUGHING)
In order to punish those who
have insulted me and my family,
I declare today that I will seek
vengeance against Ragnar Lothbrok.
By all our gods, I swear that
we will seize all his lands,
and that I will repay his
brother's treachery with the ax.
(CHEERING)
(BREATHING HEAVILY)
Who can speak to us?
I can.
I have been sent here by
Ecbert, King of Wessex.
The King regrets your attack on
the holy church at Winchester.
He wonders how much longer you
intend to remain in his kingdom.
(CLEARS THROAT)
Well, that depends.
EDMUND: Upon what?
Upon what he'll
offer us to leave.
Or what he'll
offer us to stay.
Stay?
Yes, we want to make
peace with the King.
Peace.
(GROANS)
(MEN LAUGH)
So we don't have to
kill any more of you.
I will relay your
message to the King.
(FLOKI CHUCKLES)
(SPEAKING IN NATIVE TONGUE)
(GROANS)
(LAUGHS)
(GRUNTING)
(STRAINING)
(MEN LAUGHING)
(GROANS)
(LAUGHING)
(NEIGHS)
SIGVARD: Not hungry, Bjorn?
No.
Any reason?
No reason.
Are you unhappy?
What can I do to
make you happy?
Shall I raid one of my
unsuspecting neighbors,
so you can show off
your fighting skills?
And maybe slaughter
them all?
Show that you are truly the
son of Ragnar Lothbrok?
(MEN LAUGHING)
SIGVARD:
No, believe me,
I do not like to
see you so solemn.
So tell me,
what can I do?
You can let me go live in
a cabin in the mountains.
By yourself? In the mountains?
Yes.
I'd like to test myself.
Get away from all this.
All these servants. All these
people doing everything for us.
I want to know what
is essential to life.
What is
really important.
Will you let me?
No. Of course not.
I am the earl here.
What would folk think if I let
my beloved stepson starve
or freeze to death
in some mountain pigsty?
(MEN LAUGH)
SIGVARD: You understand
that, don't you, my boy?
In any case,
I have solemnly sworn to Lagertha
that I shall take care of you.
And I will.
Rollo!
Rollo, wake up.
What?
What is it?
There are boats.
SIGGY: Who are they?
ROLLO:
I think I can guess.
Go back to the town.
Find anyone
who can fight.
Anyone who can
hold a weapon.
We're under attack.
Rollo, what is it?
What is happening?
Jarl Borg. He has come
back to attack us.
Jarl Borg?
I'm sure
it is him.
Ragnar and King Horik broke
their agreement with him.
He has returned to
gain his revenge.
What are we
going to do?
What do you think
we're going to do?
We're going to fight.
Come. Go! Go!
(INDISTINCT SHOUTING)
ROLLO: Torfin! Olaf!
One of you on each flank.
Help with the barricades.
Ragnar has taken all of
the best fighting men.
Look what we have left.
What are you doing?
What does it look like?
Not you. You are not
a shield-maiden.
You're not...
Lagertha.
Siggy, I need you to go
back to the Great Hall.
Find Princess Aslaug
and her children,
and take them up
into the mountains.
And then what?
Wait.
For what?
For whatever the gods have
decided is about to happen.
Now go.
(INDISTINCT SHOUTING)
Come on.
This way.
To the mountains.
This way. Go, Hvitserk.
Run. Quickly.
Sail down!
(HORN BLOWS)
Row! Row!
ROLLO: Stay strong!
Don't make it
easy for them!
Light the fires!
(MEN SHOUTING)
(BANGING)
ROLLO: Archers!
(INDISTINCT SHOUTING)
Oars!
ROLLO: Hold your places!
Jump ship!
(SHOUTS)
Go!
(SHOUTING)
(GROANS)
(GRUNTING)
(SCREAMS)
(GROANS)
As fast as you can!
Shields!
BOY: Rollo!
Fall back!
(SHOUTS)
Back to the
marketplace.
Move!
That's right,
Rollo, run!
Run, like
you always do.
(SHOUTING)
(GRUNTS)
Loose!
Shield-wall!
You can't win,
Rollo!
There is no disgrace in the eyes
of the gods to save yourself
for another day, Rollo.
(GROANS)
(GASPING)
Your first duty is to try and
save the sons of Ragnar.
Surrender!
Rollo,
let me speak for the gods,
for I will shortly join them
in their bright halls.
But you, you have
other work to do here.
Go.
I will tell the gods
what you have done.
Now do you surrender?
(SHOUTS)
(SCREAMS)
(ALL SHOUTING)